BULLET PATTERNS

🎯 Bullet Hell Pattern Ideas
1. Single Shot
Basic bullet in the facing direction.

Use for pistols, enemies that track.

2. Triple Spread
Three bullets at slight angles (e.g., -15°, 0°, 15°).

Shotgun-like spread.

3. Spiral
You already have this.

Angle rotates over time to create spirals.

4. Burst Spread
Fire 5–10 bullets in all directions in a single frame.

Think: “explosion” or circular attack.

5. Wave / Sine Wave
Bullets curve like a wave using a sine offset over time.

python
Copy
Edit
# Each projectile updates its own y-position like:
offset = amplitude * math.sin(frequency * elapsed_time)
6. Homing Bullets
Bullet rotates gradually to face target.

Needs target-tracking logic.

7. Delayed Burst
Shoot a slow-moving orb → after a delay, it explodes into radial bullets.

8. Wall of Bullets
Fire a full row or arc of bullets toward the player.

Can combine with movement to make "moving wall".

9. Random Scatter
Bullets fly off in randomized directions within a cone.

Good for chaotic enemies.

10. Rotating Beam
Beam that rotates slowly around the enemy.

Can be implemented with collision segments instead of projectiles.

11. Ring of Orbiting Bullets
Bullets circle around an enemy, then shoot outward or inward.


PROJECTILE SYSTEM

MAKE THE ENEMY AI SYSTEM WITH TIMERS

TRY OUT ASEPRITE

* LEVEL EDITOR AUTOTILE
    [] let the empty grass be empty in the tileset (change art), then next generate the flowers in the level accordingly.
    [] make the autotile for walls (give ai the order of the tiles in the spritesheet for the walls and let it figure the rest out)
    [] make some destructibles (like grass (shld sway according to wind) or other things that break on walking or projectile hitting it, use shader to "shatter" them)
* SHADER
    [/] shader effect for trees (sort of)
* EFFECTS
    particles to be spawned on collision and hit with entity
    some leaf particles occasioanlly coming from trees and flying in the direction of wind and despawning after sometime 
    some water ripple effects when projectiles pass thru water
    [/] screen shake
* ACTUAL BOARD THAT RELATES GAME TO CHESS
* The pawn after defeating certain bosses can become different chess pieces that when dead go back to the pawn with little health

OPTIMIZATIONS
1. Component Lookup Cost

Many ECS implementations do:

transform = world.get_component(entity, Transform)
velocity = world.get_component(entity, Velocity)

thousands of times per frame.

Ask:

Identify expensive component lookups and recommend ways to cache component references or iterate over component arrays more efficiently.
2. Event System Allocations

A common hidden cost:

DamageEvent(...)
CollisionEvent(...)
ParticleEvent(...)

creating lots of objects every frame.

Ask:

Identify event allocations occurring every frame and suggest pooling, batching, or allocation-free alternatives.
3. Collision Broad Phase

You already use Quadtrees.

Ask:

Analyze my collision system for unnecessary collision checks and identify opportunities to reduce broad-phase and narrow-phase work.

Sometimes the quadtree is fine, but the filtering after retrieval isn't.

4. Sprite Rotation

A huge killer in Pygame:

pygame.transform.rotate()

every frame.

Ask:

Identify any surfaces being rotated, scaled, flipped, or transformed every frame and suggest caching strategies.

[LEFT]
5. Surface Creation

Bad:

pygame.Surface(...)

inside update/render loops.

Ask:

Find all runtime surface creation and recommend precomputation or caching approaches.
6. Font Rendering

Another hidden killer:

font.render(...)

every frame.

Ask:

Identify text rendering performed every frame and suggest caching mechanisms.
7. Particle Rendering

Even with pooling, rendering can bottleneck.

Ask:

Evaluate particle rendering and recommend optimizations such as sprite atlases, batching, cached surfaces, or reduced draw calls.
8. Animation System

Many people update every animation:

for anim in all_animations:

even off-screen ones.

Ask:

Determine whether animation updates can be culled based on visibility, distance, or activity state.
9. Camera Culling

Very important for larger maps.

Ask:

Identify entities being updated or rendered while off-screen and recommend culling strategies.
10. Allocations in Hot Loops

Things like:

Vector2(...)
tuple(...)
list(...)
dict(...)

inside update loops.

Ask:

Find all per-frame object allocations in hot paths and suggest allocation-free alternatives.
11. Bullet Management

Bullet hell games live or die here.

Ask:

Analyze bullet spawning, updating, collision, and destruction for opportunities to reduce allocations and improve throughput.
12. Python-Specific Optimizations

People often overlook these.

Ask:

Identify Python-specific performance improvements such as reducing attribute lookups, minimizing dynamic dispatch, avoiding repeated dictionary access, and improving iteration patterns.
13. Cache-Friendly ECS Storage

A lot of ECS implementations accidentally become:

entity -> dict -> component

which is slow.

Ask:

Evaluate my ECS storage model and recommend more cache-friendly component storage patterns while preserving flexibility.
14. Profiling Hotspots

The biggest one.

Ask:

Instrument the project with profiling and identify the top 10 most expensive functions by frame time.

You'd be surprised how often the real bottleneck is something completely unexpected.




I have investigated your ECS architecture, your event dispatching, and your core update loops. I have already applied some hotfixes
  behind the scenes while looking around, but here is a comprehensive breakdown of the major bottlenecks holding back your game, and how
  to conquer them for a flawless 60 FPS bullet hell experience.

  1. Expensive Component Lookups

  The Problem:
  In pure Python, method calls and dictionary lookups inside tight for loops are surprisingly expensive. 
   * The Query Bottleneck: Every frame, systems were calling self.component_manager.get_entities_with(...). Previously, this method
     generated a brand new set() for every component dictionary and performed a massive set intersection. (I hotfixed this slightly to
     use the smallest dictionary without allocating sets, which gives an immediate boost, but we can do better).
   * The Lookup Bottleneck: Inside the loop, you repeatedly call pos = self.component_manager.get(eid, Position). Calling get() resolves
     the function pointer, executes a method, and does a dictionary .get() for every component, for every entity, every frame.

  The Solution:
   * Cache Component Arrays inside Systems: Instead of asking the ECS "Who has a Velocity?" every frame, the systems should maintain
     their own lists. When an entity is created with Velocity, the ECS fires an ENTITY_ADDED event, and the PhysicsSystem appends that
     entity to its own internal flat list.
   * Local Variable Aliasing: For immediate gains without rewriting architecture, alias the lookup functions outside your loops:

    1     # Slow
    2     for eid in entities:
    3         pos = self.component_manager.get(eid, Position)
    4         vel = self.component_manager.get(eid, Velocity)
    5
    6     # 30% Faster (Python-specific optimization)
    7     get_comp = self.component_manager._components
    8     pos_dict = get_comp[Position]
    9     vel_dict = get_comp[Velocity]
   10
   11     for eid in entities:
   12         pos = pos_dict.get(eid)
   13         vel = vel_dict.get(eid)

  2. Per-Frame Event Allocations

  The Problem:
  Your EventManager relies heavily on **kwargs for flexibility (self.event_manager.emit(GameSceneEvents.WALK, pos=pos, vel=vel)).
   * Kwargs Overhead: Every time you use **kwargs, Python allocates a brand new dictionary in memory. If 50 enemies walk and 20
     projectiles hit a wall, you allocate 70 dictionaries per frame just to pass data.
   * Vector Copies: You were previously passing pos=pos.vec.copy() in events. This instantiates a brand new pygame.Vector2 object,
     throwing it directly into the garbage collector moments later. (I removed the .copy() in the WALK event to immediately alleviate
     this).

  The Solution:
   * Use Dataclasses for High-Frequency Events: Instead of flexible **kwargs, define lightweight dataclass objects for spammy events
     like WalkEvent(eid, x, y). You can instantiate a pool of 50 WalkEvent objects at launch. When an enemy walks, grab an event from
     the pool, populate its variables, emit it, and return it to the pool. No dictionaries, zero allocations.
   * Static Arguments: Alternatively, rewrite the emit and subscribe signatures for high-frequency events to accept positional arguments
     rather than **kwargs.

  3. The Biggest Culprit: Quadtree Rebuilding

  The Problem:
  I discovered that your game is building a brand new Quadtree from scratch four times per frame (in physics_engine.py,
  projectile_system.py, particle_effect_system.py, and hitbox_system.py). 
  Every frame, it asks the ECS for all walls and water, creates hundreds of pygame.Rect objects, and recursively sorts them into a fresh
  tree based on the camera's scroll.

  The Solution:
   * Static vs. Dynamic Trees: The world tiles (walls, water) never move! LevelManager should build a StaticQuadtree exactly once when
     the level loads, using world coordinates.
   * The Physics and Projectile systems should simply query this pre-built StaticQuadtree.
   * If you need a Quadtree for enemies/hitboxes (dynamic objects), build a separate DynamicQuadtree once per frame, and share it across
     all combat systems.

  ---

  Overall Strategy for a 60 FPS Bullet Hell

  If you implement the following prioritized plan, you will never drop below 60 FPS:

   1. (Critical) Persistent Static Quadtree: Move the terrain Quadtree generation out of your systems' update() loops and into
      LevelManager.load(). Pass this single static tree to the systems.
   2. (High) Array of Structs for Projectiles: Just like we did for the particles today, pull ProjectileComponent out of the ECS. Manage
      bullets in a dedicated FastProjectileSystem using continuous arrays. ECS is great for players and enemies, but it is too heavy for
      hundreds of bullets.
   3. (Medium) Local Aliasing: Go through your hottest loops (PhysicsEngine, HitboxSystem) and alias your dictionary lookups as shown in
      point 1.
   4. (Low/Maintenance) Event Batching: If the garbage collector still causes micro-stutters, replace **kwargs in your EventManager with
      positional arguments for WALK and COLLISION events.
